---
layout: post
title: "Lightning Network's Monetary Evolution"
date: 2023-06-28
author: Pavan Joshi
categories: ['Stories', 'Lightning Network']
---

🎉 Hooray! I am absolutely thrilled to share that I have once again been
accepted into the prestigious Summer of Bitcoin program! 🌟 This marks my
second time participating in this incredible opportunity to contribute to the world's most prominent monetary system.

As I reflect on my journey so far, I am filled with excitement as I kickstart
my latest project titled "_**Revolutionizing Lightning Payments: Developing
Tools and Standards for Metadata Integration.**_ " 💼🔧✨

Throughout this internship, I will be working with the remarkable **getAlby
🐝** lightning browser extension, which empowers users to effortlessly make
lightning-fast payments directly from their web browsers. 🌐⚡.

Before diving into the project. I like to explain how important this project
and what problems it aims to solve. so lets kickstart with the problem that we
can solve with the bitcoin!!!

### 🌐 The Dirty Internet Problem

🌐 The "Dirty Internet" problem is my self-concept of describing the Internet
which lacks monetization policies, leading to an influx of click baits and
related issues.

HTTP came into existence, which enabled the transfer of information over the
Internet. But what about the payments? Such internet had lack of a
standardized payment mechanism.

But the visionary developers of the internet left us with the HTTP status code
402. This status code was declared to enable payments over the Internet and
this led to the development of various fiat payment gateways.

_**Now the question is does fiat payment gateways are really as good as we
think?**_

fiat payment gateways are:-

  1. Divided by the borders

  2. Centralized and censorship prone

  3. No monetization policies.

💰🚧 The lack of a native payment layer and monetization policies lead to

  1. Low-quality content over the Internet

  2. Lots of clickbait (Imagine going through tons of ads to access a particular content).

  3. Unavailability, Centralisation, and Costly.

Fiat Payment gateways are not for all also you can’t do any micropayments with
them Instantly. Imagine paying content creators for any podcast. Imagine
monetization of podcasts or the music or game industry.  
  
Imagine the long hall of processes you have to follow! 😵‍💫. This also leads to
alternate ways of earning money over the internet such as ads leading to less
quality content over the internet and lots of click baits.  
  
_**What if we have a financial system, which is free, easy to integrate and
payment flows can be attached to any interaction over the internet?**_

### The Solution: Lightning Network ⚡

💡 The Lightning Network: Empowering a Seamless and Efficient Internet Payment
Solution:

The Lightning Network offers a groundbreaking solution by creating a robust
native payment layer for the internet.

It revolutionizes online transactions by enabling seamless payment flows and
financial activities across various online platforms. ⚡️🌐

  1. lightning-fast processing times ⚡️

  2. 24/7 availability 🌕

  3. The ability to transcend borders and resist censorship 🌍🔒

  4. Payment flows can be attached to any action that can be performed on the website. 💸✨

Imagine a client immersed in your article, and as they reach the end, a
payment window gracefully appears. It's an opportunity for readers to show
their appreciation for your exceptional content.📖💕 After all, everyone
deserves recognition for their valuable contributions, don't they? 🙌

Most Importantly using Bitcoin and lightning payments to monetize content over
the internet is completely _**FREE and EASY**_. You don’t have to spend
thousands of bucks to integrate fiat payment gateways into your website. 💰🌐

### Lightning Web Integration

⚡️ Lightning Web Integration: Bridging Two Powerful Networks

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!ZQ2T!,w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fd1d59498-acfc-4851-b1ea-d36449825acc_1230x684.png)

To harness the full potential of the Lightning Network as a native payment
layer, it is crucial to bring together two vital networks: the Lightning
Network and the internet. This harmonious integration, known as Lightning Web
Integration, enables these networks to operate in tandem with minimal effort,
resulting in a stronger, combined, and seamless experience.

🔗 The Power of Lightning on the Web: To unlock the power of lightning on the
web, several tools and technologies can be leveraged, including:

1️⃣ LNURL: Simplifying Lightning payments with easy-to-use URLs.

2️⃣ Lightning Address: Streamlining payment processes using user-friendly
identifiers.

3️⃣ WebLN: Enabling seamless interaction between web applications and the
Lightning Network.

4️⃣ Other Options: Exploring APIs, LNC (Lightning Network Client), LSAT
(Lightning Service Authentication Tokens), and more.

By embracing Lightning Web Integration, we open up a world of possibilities
where lightning-fast transactions and the vastness of the internet converge,
empowering users with efficient and secure online experiences. ⚡️🌐

### WE are Not too Early!

📈 The Lightning Network has experienced an astonishing growth rate of 410%
annually, solidifying Bitcoin as a legitimate competitor currency to the US
dollar. 💪💰

To put it into perspective, let's consider the purchasing power of Bitcoin.
Here's a price comparison of potato chips bought in US dollars and Bitcoin: 🥔🍟

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!ZT-Q!,w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fc1ed6c39-008c-4ee3-aeef-c0966d19e685_807x682.png)

 _**Bitcoin has gained more purchasing power most of the time since 2019**_

With Bitcoin's increasing adoption and value, it's fascinating to witness its
potential as a medium of exchange and store of value. 🌐🚀

💰 Monetization with the Lightning Network is not only efficient but also free
of cost! Here are some examples of websites that have embraced the Lightning
Network as a native payment layer:  
  
1\. Stacker News: 📰 Represents how the News Industry can be monetized

2\. WaveLake: 🎥 Represents how the Media Industry can be monetized

3\. LN BlackJack: ♠️ Represents how the gaming Industry can be monetized

💡 Not just this, you can discover hundreds of websites that utilize the
Lightning Network as a native payment layer. Visit makers.bolt.fun to explore
a wide range of platforms embracing Lightning payments! ⚡️🌐

🎵🔒 Here's a simple example showcasing the effortless monetization of a music
website.

With the Lightning Network, you can seamlessly integrate a payment solution
without the need to invest substantial funds in integrating traditional
payment gateways. It's a cost-effective and efficient way to monetize your
music platform! 💰💻

 _**How Easy it is to integrate such native payment layer?**_ let me show you
with the lightning address.

### Value For Value Payments: Direct contributions from your audience

📢🔌 With Lightning Address, you can receive direct contributions in Bitcoin
from your audience, empowering monetization across various platforms. Whether
it's your personal website, social handles like Twitter, or content creation
sites like YouTube and Medium, you can effortlessly monetize your online
presence. It's a game-changer for content creators! 💸💡

**Discover a World of Monetization Possibilities with GetAlby!:** Unleash the
Power of Lightning Network for Monetization!

🌟 GetAlby is the ultimate lightning browser extension that enables seamless
and hassle-free monetization using Lightning Network. Say goodbye to
complicated integration processes and expensive payment gateways. GetAlby
empowers you to easily receive lightning-fast payments directly from your
audience, whether it's on your website, social media platforms, or content
creation sites.

_**Monetization of your website**_

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!rv4b!,w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F875308f0-d128-482e-952d-cf6265bbcbad_1920x892.png)

 _**Monetization of Twitter**_

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!iGPp!,w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F9ab66d21-1b1a-4ae1-adb3-1bc58925bd12_1920x892.png)

 _**Monetization of Youtube**_

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!Y1ii!,w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fcefbb0e0-db59-41cc-8116-3c3b67e593c1_1920x892.png)

you will find tons of monetization strategies for different websites not just
with lightning address but also with lnurl and webln specifications. Visit
getalby.com to know more.

### Conclusion

In conclusion, the Lightning Network revolutionizes online transactions by
providing a seamless and efficient native payment layer for the internet. With
lightning-fast processing times ⚡, 24/7 availability 🌐, and the ability to
transcend borders and resist censorship 🔒, it empowers businesses, content
creators, and individuals to monetize their online presence. The integration
of Lightning Web brings together the Lightning Network and the internet,
enabling effortless payment processes and creating a seamless user experience.
With the Lightning Network's significant growth 📈 and the emergence of
platforms like GetAlby 🌟, the possibilities for lightning-fast monetization
are expanding, making Bitcoin a legitimate competitor currency to the US
dollar 💪💰. Embrace the Lightning Network and unlock new revenue streams in the
digital world. 💼💡✨

In my next article, I will delve into the game-changing potential of
integrating metadata in the Lightning Network, exploring how it can elevate
the functionality and effectiveness of this monetary system. As I embark on
this exciting journey during the Summer of Bitcoin, I look forward to
unveiling the possibilities and impact of metadata integration. Stay tuned!
💼🔗✨

Thanks for reading Pavan’s Substack! Subscribe for free to receive new posts
and support my work.

Subscribe

4

#### Share this post

![](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!k7GE!,w_520,h_272,c_fill,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep,g_auto/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F43ff844e-5d5f-49e9-b44d-c1ee02fd1dcf_799x440.png)

![Pavan’s
Substack](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!UULv!,w_36,h_36,c_fill,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep,g_auto/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-
post-
media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F6725f2b4-6fdd-47ce-9ebf-334c1645abc1_400x400.jpeg)

Pavan’s Substack

SOB'2023: Lightning Network's Monetary Evolution

Copy link

Facebook

Email

Notes

More

2

Share
