---
layout: post
title: "Break, Build, Repeat: Designing a Lightning Wallet That Actually Makes Sense"
date: 2023-06-01
author: tanishka Sharma
categories: ['Stories', 'Design']
---

## A bit about my journey

Initially, I was unaware of Summer of Bitcoin’s new designer’s track. Upon
discovering it, I swiftly updated my portfolio with recent work and applied
within three days. I got in!

Our journey then included a Bitcoin educational course, proposal round, and
more.

This was the design track’s first launch at Summer of Bitcoin, posing a
challenge due to the lack of previous year’s design-specific proposals for
reference. We had frontend-dev proposals to look at, which were the closest
available option for design track applicants.

## How’s the competition?

More than 10,350 students from 74 countries applied to this year’s Summer of
Bitcoin program, with the number of applicants typically ranging between
10,000 and 15,000+.

<figure>
<img src="https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*8SZzR5-bMlB5l-Y84YfCPg.jpeg"/>
</figure>

This intense competition is particularly noticeable for those interested in
the design track. This is not to undermine the efforts of developer track
participants who tirelessly work day and night to shape the future of Bitcoin
and its wallets. However, the design track presents a challenge due to a
smaller pool of projects available for contribution, in contrast to the
developer track which benefits from a wealth of reference proposals spanning
several years.

## How to choose your project?

Before you choose your project, go through all the links provided to you.
Like, in my case it was the [bitcoin
guide](https://guide.summerofbitcoin.org/) website. It covers all the topics
like how to find right project, how to write proposals etc. Trust me when I
say, you need to go through all of them thoroughly.

Now when you are done with that, you are free to explore through all the
[projects/organizations](https://www.summerofbitcoin.org/organizations) and
find the right fit for you.

> **Which project fits you best?**

Here, it’s crucial to be honest with yourself when selecting a project. Opting
for the most challenging project doesn’t guarantee an advantage due to
potentially lower competition. Instead, choose something you’re confident in
and skilled at. Keep in mind that the internship will present its fair share
of challenges and provide ample opportunities for learning and growth. [Read
for more.](https://guide.summerofbitcoin.org/the-proposal-round/finding-the-
right-organization-and-project)  
Also choose something that excites you!

> **What to do next?**

Generally, there is an option to submit a maximum of 3 proposals for three
different projects. Many people opt for this approach to enhance their chances
of being selected. According to me, it’s advantageous, especially if you have
a 2–3 month timeframe until the proposal round concludes. However, I chose to
focus on just one. Juggling multiple proposals in short amount of time could
potentially divert your attention in three different directions.

So, if you’re short on time like me and are concentrating on just one project,
start by researching it. Join its communities on platforms like Discord or
Slack. Gather all the GitHub links you can find and read through the pull
requests along with the accompanying comments. Make sure you have access to
all available information about your project on the internet. Since it’s an
open-source endeavor, obtaining this information should be relatively easy.

## Be Active!

Having joined the communities and social media platforms, introduce yourself
and engage with others. Maybe try to help where possible. Subscribe to
newsletters for volunteer opportunities. Join community calls and learn
established practices. Start contributing through small actions like pull
requests or reviews. For new projects, brainstorm logo designs. These
practices will help you stay engaged in your project. Respect everyone
throughout this process. I’ve seen contributors show arrogance when mentors
couldn’t respond promptly. Remember, mentors are busy, and mistakes are
unintentional. Let’s empathize and support each other as humans.

## How to make a impactful proposal?

Before we start this topic, a frequently asked question is

> How much time is required to make an impactful proposal?

I personally had 15 days to complete all these processes: researching the
organization, exploring the project, contributing to the community, and
crafting a proposal. It was quite challenging for me, especially since it
coincided with the end of my semester.

For a more well-organized and thorough approach, I would recommend allocating
30–45 days (particularly if you’re new to open source) to the entire process.

To create a compelling proposal, it’s essential to divide it into four parts:

  1. About Me: Share your background, your interest in Bitcoin, and a bit about your hobbies.
  2. Project Choice: Explain why you’ve selected this specific project.
  3. Work Experience: Detail your previous work, even informal creative endeavors, to showcase your skills and expertise.
  4. Planning and Schedule: Break down your project into manageable tasks, considering your availability. Outline how you intend to efficiently complete it within the allotted time.

Remember, a well-structured and comprehensive proposal can greatly enhance
your chances of making a significant impact within the open-source community.  
For further reference I’m adding my
[proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1g0-WVwCTPk4Saa8qmTxZBZo9ibPkmH2h29DyxH225yo/edit?usp=sharing)
as well as all the proposals which were
[accepted](https://www.summerofbitcoin.org/2023-accepted-projects) this Summer
of Bitcoin.

## Whom to ask for help if stuck?

Technically, you can always tag your assigned mentor in the community and ask
your queries. If they happens to be busy (which is often the case, considering
they review around 20 proposals per day), you may send your proposal to the
host/administrator of your program. They possess considerable experience and
expertise in this area, enabling them to discern which proposals are likely to
be successful and which ones may not make the cut.

## Conclusion

Generally, the proposal round is the final stage. However, in certain cases,
mentors might request an interview or a zoom/meet with you, so it’s advisable
to be ready for such an eventuality. This happened unexpectedly in my case,
but my thorough research allowed me to confidently address my mentor’s
questions.  
Also check out my blogs on making lightning wallet from scratch:  
[#blog1](/@sharmataneshka/break-build-repeat-my-journey-designing-a-bitcoin-
lightning-wallet-cba3a5d9cde5) : For design brainstorming, UX research  
[#blog2](/@sharmataneshka/eureka-insights-into-branding-and-
design-80ba1bd47f2f) : For branding and UI guide

All the best to all future contributors. Hopefully, this guidance proves
helpful. If you have any questions, feel free to leave a comment, and I’ll
respond as promptly as I can.

