---
layout: post
title: "A Comprehensive Guide to Contributing to Trezor-Client"
date: 2023-07-19
author: Piyush Kumar
categories: ['Stories', 'Wallets']
---

# A Comprehensive Guide to Contributing to Trezor-Client

Greetings, fellow developers and contributors!

Within the realm of open-source projects, collaboration is key, and the
Trezor-Client project is no exception. This document has been meticulously
crafted to serve as a beacon for all those eager to dive into the world of
Trezor-Client contributions. In the pages that follow, we will delve into the
intricate details of the project's directory structure, gain insights into
related files within the expansive Trezor Monorepo, and unlock the mysteries
behind the functionality of Trezor-Client.

## Unveiling Trezor-Client: A Gateway to Trezor Hardware Wallets

Trezor-Client is not just a library; it's a bridge that connects developers to
Trezor hardware wallets. Facilitating seamless communication, this library
employs a standardized transport mechanism that serves as the backbone of
communication. An interesting facet to note is the support for UDP, expanding
the horizons of communication capabilities to encompass interaction with the
simulator as well.

## Navigating the Monorepo: More Than Meets the Eye

The Trezor Monorepo is a vast expanse housing a plethora of components, but
fear not, not all corners of it need concern you! For those with a singular
focus on Trezor-Client, your journey within the repository can be streamlined.
Direct your gaze toward `trezor-firmware/rust/trezor-client`, the sanctum
where the entire Rust crate of Trezor-Client resides, holding the secrets to
its functionality.

## Decoding the Rust Crate Enigma

You may be wondering, "What exactly is this Rust crate?" Allow us to
illuminate your path. Trezor-Client is not just a project; it's a Rust crate,
showcased on the illustrious crates.io platform. This strategic choice of
distribution isn't just for convenience—it provides a window into the
organizational structure within the crate itself. Navigate into the `src/`
directory, and you'll uncover a treasure trove of source code essential for
executing the desired operations.

### Dividing and Conquering: Subdirectories in src/

Peering into the depths of `src/`, you'll find a series of subdirectories,
each with its own distinct purpose. For instance, the `transport/` folder
holds the keys to Transport's implementation—a fundamental cornerstone of the
project. Similarly, the `client/` directory conceals the files that unleash
the functions exposed by this library, ready to cater to the needs of those
who beckon its capabilities.

### A Glimpse of the Unconventional: trezor-client/protob

In the labyrinth of source code, a peculiar folder emerges—`trezor-
client/protob`. Depending on your perspective, this space may appear vacant or
brimming with files. In the intricate dance of code, it is interwoven with
`trezor-firmware/common/protob` through a symbolic link. As the crate is
published, this link is expanded by Cargo, seamlessly providing users with a
protobuf files without the need for replication within the monorepo. Other
noteworthy directories include `scripts/` and `examples/`. While the former
bestows scripts for proto and message generation, the latter offers a gallery
of quintessential examples showcasing the crate's potential.

### Evolution of Automation: The Role of build.rs

In the evolution of the crate, the responsibilities once housed within the
`scripts/` directory have now migrated to a new orchestrator—the `build.rs`
file. This evolution encapsulates the spirit of automation, ensuring smoother
workflows and reducing manual intervention.

## Embark on Your Contribution Odyssey

Armed with this newfound knowledge, you're well-prepared to embark on your
contribution journey to Trezor-Client. Whether you're here to enhance
functionality, optimize performance, or explore uncharted territories, the
Trezor Monorepo beckons with its promise of collaboration and innovation.
Remember, as you traverse the intricate maze of code, you're not just
contributing to a project; you're becoming a part of an ecosystem that
empowers and shapes the future of Trezor-Client.

So, seize your keyboard, ignite your imagination, and let your code become a
symphony of innovation within the harmonious ensemble of Trezor-Client. Your
journey is bound to be as rewarding as the destination itself. Happy coding!
