---
layout: post
title: "Polishing the Caravan Redesign: A Summer of Bitcoin Design Journey"
date: 2024-08-29
author: Arilewola Sodiq
categories: [Caravan, Stories]
image: ""
---

A design, no matter how beautiful, is incomplete without the touchstone of
user feedback. It’s like crafting a masterpiece and then letting your audience
critique it; it’s a humbling, yet essential process.

My journey to refine the Caravan interface was akin to sculpting a piece of
marble. The vision was not to only redesign the Caravan platform, but it also
needed shaping and polishing. User testing became my chisel, chipping away at
imperfections and revealing the true beauty of the design.

It was a rollercoaster of emotions. There were moments of triumph when users
intuitively grasped the interface, their actions mirroring my design
intentions. But there were also instances of frustration when users stumbled
upon roadblocks we hadn’t anticipated.

One particular challenge was using a QR code on the receiving page to receive
Bitcoin. While I thought I had created a clear representation, users found it
overwhelming. I went back to the drawing board, simplifying the display, and
adding interactive elements to provide more context.

The transaction signing flow was another area that required refinement. Users
expressed confusion about certain steps. By observing their interactions, I
identified pain points and redesigned the flow to be more intuitive and
secure.

Incorporating user feedback was an iterative process. I didn’t always get it
right the first time, but each iteration brought me closer to a design that
truly resonated with the users. It was a constant balancing act between
staying true to the vision and adapting to user needs.

Throughout the user testing process, collaboration with the Caravan team was
essential. Their expertise and insights provided valuable perspectives that
helped me make informed design decisions. By working together, we were able to
create a design that not only met the users’ needs but also aligned with the
overall vision of the project.

The journey has been demanding, but the rewards are immense. Seeing users
interact with the redesigned Caravan, their faces lighting up with
understanding, is the ultimate validation of my efforts. It’s a testament to
the power of design when it’s centered around the user.

# **Visual Note**

These images showcase the transformative impact of the Caravan stateless
coordinator redesign project. The “Before” panel depicts the original user
interface, highlighting its complexity and potential usability challenges. In
contrast, the “After” panel reveals the redesigned interface, featuring a more
intuitive layout, streamlined navigation, and a visually appealing aesthetic.
This transformation demonstrates the project’s success in enhancing the
overall user experience and making the Caravan application more accessible to
a wider audience.

  1. **Landing page**

L-R: Before and After of the Caravan landing page

**2\. Wallet Setup Page**

Before

After

**3\. Wallet Overview Page**

L-R: Before and After of the Caravan Wallet Overview

**4\. Sending Page**

L-R: Before and After of the Caravan Sending Screen

**5\. Receiving Page**

L-R: Before and After of the Caravan Receiving Screen

**6\. UTXOs Page**

L-R: Before and After of the Caravan UTXOs Screen

**7\. Addresses Page**

L-R: Before and After of the Caravan Addresses Screen

Click here to see the final product.
