---
layout: post
title: "My Summer of Bitcoin Journey: Building a CSV Export Feature for Zeus"
date: 2024-07-24
author: "Ajeet Tiwari"
categories: [Zeus, Stories]
image: "https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:889/1*Bp-scavo2MJlSwcXmmP4gQ.png"
---
**Timeline** : From Initial “What on Earth is This?” to “Aha, Got It!”🤯

**Initial Exploration and Understanding (Early Summer 2024)**  
So there I was, staring at the **Zeus** app’s codebase like it was a puzzle
box from a sci-fi movie. The first question that popped into my head? “Am I
supposed to understand this, or is it just me?” (Spoiler: It wasn’t just me.)
😅Cue multiple meetings with my mentor, Shubham Sir, who probably got tired of
my endless “But why?” questions. We dove deep into the specifics of the CSV
export feature, and by “dove deep,” I mean I was floundering around until
things started making sense. By the end of this phase, I was finally in the
loop on what needed to be done — well, mostly.

**The Research Chronicles: Finding the Perfect Package** 🕵️‍♂️**(Mid-Summer
2024):**  
Armed with a vague sense of purpose and a growing fear of CSV files, I began
researching the packages I’d need for this task.🕵️‍♂️ You ever try to pick the
best option when they all kinda look the same? Yeah, it was like that. After a
lot of “Well, this one seems okay… I think?” moments, I settled on the best
package for the job. Then, it was off to the documentation races! I spent what
felt like years reading commands, testing features, and hoping the package
wouldn’t crash the app. Thankfully, no major catastrophes — yet.🤞

Working!!

**The Sample App Saga: Testing in a Safe Zone** 🛠️**(Mid-Summer 2024):**  
Alright, time to get serious. I whipped up a sample React Native app focused
solely on the CSV export feature. Why? Because I didn’t want to be the guy who
broke the Zeus app in the name of “progress.” 😬Testing the feature in this
safe, contained environment was a bit like assembling IKEA furniture:
frustrating at times, but oh-so-satisfying when things finally clicked into
place. After some fine-tuning (and a few frustrated sighs), I had a working
prototype. Cue the mini victory dance. 🕺

** _Sample App —_**** _Click Here_**

**(Trust me, it’s cooler than it sounds.)** 😎

**The Integration Adventure: Bringing It All Together** 🥳**(Late Summer
2024):**  
Now, for the main event — bringing my creation into the Zeus app. This is
where things got real. Understanding the specific data parameters of Zeus was
like deciphering ancient scrolls, but I eventually got the hang of it. 📜I
created a new feature branch and committed my progress like I was writing in
my diary: meticulously and with a hint of paranoia that I might mess something
up. After everything was in place, I turned to styling. Because who doesn’t
love a CSV feature that looks as good as it works? (Answer: no one.)💅

Feature Code — _Click Here_

**(It’s like the sample app, but better. Much better.)** 🔥

Why not, a mind map to understand better!

**Mid-Term Musings: The Rollercoaster Ride 🎢**

By the halfway point, I was fully immersed in the Summer of Bitcoin community
and the Zeus project. My mentor and the community were incredible sources of
support — and let’s be honest, I needed all the help I could get. 🙌The sense
of achievement at this stage was off the charts. 📈The feature I worked on was
starting to take shape within the app, and I was feeling pretty darn good
about it. Maybe I was getting the hang of this after all?😎

:) May happen :)

**The Final Countdown: Wrapping Up and Reflecting** 🎯

As the project neared completion, it was all about polishing the CSV export
feature, squashing any lingering bugs, and making sure everything ran
smoothly. 🧹The journey from “What is this?” to “Look what I made!” was
incredibly rewarding. I mean, who doesn’t love seeing their work go live and
actually, you know, _work_?😅

**Gratitude and Looking Forward: The Final Act** 🌟

Reflecting on this whirlwind adventure, I’m filled with gratitude.
🙏Contributing to the Zeus project through the Summer of Bitcoin program has
been an experience I’ll never forget. Not only did I level up my technical
skills, but I also learned invaluable lessons in project management and
collaboration. Huge thanks to the entire **Summer of Bitcoin** team, the
**Zeus** team, and especially my mentor, **Shubham** **Sir** , for their
endless patience and support.🌟

Looking ahead, I’m excited about the potential impact of what we’ve
accomplished. The journey was challenging, sure, but it was also incredibly
fulfilling. And now? I can’t wait to see where the Zeus app goes from here.🚀

😅 Yeah!!

P.S. Forgive me if this blog reads like a rookie’s first draft. I promise I’m
better at coding than I am at writing. 😅 Thanks for sticking with me through
this rollercoaster of a blog post!

Author :  
Ajeet Tiwari
