---
layout: post
title: "Bringing the Caravan Redesign to Life: A Summer of Bitcoin Design Journey"
date: 2024-07-30
author: "Arilewola Sodiq"
categories: [Caravan, Stories]
image: "assets/images/avatar.png"
---

In my previous post, we explored the foundational stages of the redesign
process: user research, information architecture, and wireframing. Today,
we’re diving into the exciting world of visual design, transforming those
wireframes into a visually appealing and intuitive interface.

**Crafting a Visual Language**

Before diving into the design itself, there’s a need to establish a visual
language for the Caravan application. This involved defining the overall
aesthetic, color palette, typography, and iconography.

Selecting the right colors, fonts, and icons was like choosing the perfect
wardrobe for a character in a film. The goal was to have a look that was both
familiar and fresh, something that resonated with the Bitcoin community
without alienating newcomers. It was a delicate balance, and there were
moments of doubt.

“Is this color too bold?” I questioned. “Are these fonts legible enough?”
These were the types of dilemmas I faced. But with each iteration, I refined
the vision, crafting a visual language that was both inviting and informative.

Color style

Font style

Icons

**Building a Design System**

Creating a design system was like constructing the skeleton of a building. The
goal is to have a structure that is strong, flexible, and adaptable. This
meant defining a set of reusable components — buttons, input fields, and the
like — that would become the building blocks of our design.

It wasn’t always smooth sailing. There were times when I felt like I was
hitting a brick wall, unable to find the perfect component. But through
perseverance and help from my mentor who is also a designer, I overcame these
challenges, creating a design system that was both functional and
aesthetically pleasing.

Buttons

Input fields

Sidebar

Footer

Header

**From Wireframes to High-Fidelity Designs**

With the design system in place, I transformed those wireframes into high-
fidelity designs. It was like watching a character evolve from a rough sketch
to a fully realized persona. Each element was carefully considered, from the
placement of buttons to the choice of colors.

I faced the challenge of balancing aesthetics with usability. A design that
looks stunning but is difficult to navigate is like a beautiful book with
indecipherable text. I refined the interface through constant testing and
iteration to ensure it was visually appealing and user-friendly.

Landing page

Wallet setup screens

Wallet overview

Receiving screen

UTXOs screen

Sending transaction and signing transaction

Address screens

Click here to view the prototype of the project

**Key Considerations:**

  * **Clarity and Simplicity:** I prioritized clear and concise information presentation, avoiding clutter and overwhelming users.
  * **Accessibility:** Ensuring the design is accessible to users with disabilities is a top priority. I adhered to accessibility guidelines to make the application usable by everyone.
  * **User Testing:** Throughout the design process, we continued to conduct user testing to gather feedback and refine the interface.

It was a journey filled with both triumphs and setbacks, but the result is a
design that will enhance the Caravan user experience. Stay tuned as we delve
deeper into how incorporating feedback from user testing helps in making
further improvements to the design in the next post.
