---
layout: post
title: "Overcoming Fear: My Unexpected Journey into Open Source with Summer of Bitcoin"
date: 2025-07-01
author: Fazle Rabbi Ferdaus
categories: [SeedSigner, Stories]
---

For a long time, I’ve had two competing feelings. The first was a strong
desire to dive into the world of open-source software. The idea of
contributing to projects that people all over the world use is incredibly
exciting. The second, however, was a nagging fear, the fear of engaging with
experienced developers, of not being good enough, of that first, intimidating
step.

This year, I decided it was time to push past that fear. It turns out, this
would be a multi-stage journey, and this is the story of how it all began.

## The Search for an Open Door

My journey began with a simple search. I started looking for structured
programs that help newcomers get into open source. The usual suspects popped
up: Google Summer of Code, mentorships with the Linux Foundation, and programs
by Major League Hacking. They all looked amazing, but then I stumbled upon the
Summer of Bitcoin.

What caught my eye? The applications for their 2025 program were open right
then and there. It felt like a sign. Instead of waiting or overthinking, I
decided to take the leap.

## The Application: A Leap of Faith and a Surprise

The application process was straightforward but one section gave me pause. It
offered the chance to share your profile from problem solving platforms like
LeetCode or Codeforces etc. The idea was that if your profile demonstrated
strong problem solving skills you could be exempted from their technical
assessment.

Now, I’ll be honest, my profile isn’t something I’d normally boast about. I’ve
solved problems but I’m no competitive programming wizard. I figured I had
nothing to lose, so I linked my profile and submitted my application, fully
expecting to have to grind through a coding test later.

Then, the email arrived. Not only was I accepted, but they had exempted me
from the problem-solving assessment! I was shocked and thrilled. It was a huge
lesson for me: don’t underestimate your own skills, and always take the
chance. You never know what opportunities might come from it.

But getting accepted wasn’t the finish line; it was just the firing of the
starting pistol. Little did I know, the real challenge “**a four-week
assignment bootcamp** ” designed to test every applicant’s skills — was just
around the corner.