---
layout: post
title: "My First Blog — Building with Bitcoin in Summer of Bitcoin 2025"
date: 2025-07-10
author: Priya Rani
categories: [braidpool, Stories]
---

## Transaction Patterns and Their Privacy Scores:

Different transaction structures tell different stories about your spending
behavior:

**Perfect Spend (1 input, 1 output):** The most private transaction type.
You’re spending exactly what you received with no change, making it difficult
to trace further.

**Simple Spend (1 input, 2 outputs):** Common for everyday transactions where
you spend part of a UTXO and receive change. Offers moderate privacy.

**Consolidation (Multiple inputs, 1 output):** When you combine many small
UTXOs into one larger one. This offers low privacy because it clearly links
multiple addresses to the same owner.

**CoinJoin (Many inputs, many outputs):** A privacy technique where multiple
users combine their transactions, making it extremely difficult to trace
individual spending.

<figure>
<img src="https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*a5sOFJhoFunrnaDESjURaQ.png"/>
</figure>

# What I Learned from Caravan

  * Bitcoin is public by design. Every transaction can be traced if patterns aren’t managed carefully.
  * Your **wallet software’s behavior** — like how it creates change or groups inputs — can leak identity clues.
  * **Smart coin selection** reduces both traceability and fees.

# Tips for a Healthier Wallet

  * Don’t reuse Bitcoin addresses
  * Use privacy-respecting wallets like **Sparrow** or **Samourai**
  * Consolidate coins when the network fee is low
  * Avoid “dust” — tiny UTXOs that cost more to spend
  * Periodically check wallet behavior using tools like Caravan Health

# How I Learned: Handwritten Notes & Flowcharts

When I first encountered these concepts, I was overwhelmed by the technical
jargon. What helped me was creating hand-drawn diagrams and flowcharts showing
how UTXOs flow through transactions. Visualizing the process made abstract
concepts concrete.

I drew out scenarios like:

  * How UTXOs accumulate in a wallet over time
  * What optimal coin selection looks like in practice
  * How privacy and efficiency trade-offs work in real transactions

These visual learning tools helped me understand not just the “what” but the
“why” behind wallet health principles.

# Looking Ahead

Understanding wallet health is just the beginning. In my next post, I’ll dive
deeper into the specific features I contributed to Caravan, including script-
type badges and wallet-health chips. These UI enhancements aim to make
Bitcoin’s complex transaction mechanics more accessible and transparent for
everyday users.

The goal isn’t just to build better tools — it’s to help every Bitcoin user
understand how their choices affect their privacy and costs. Because in
Bitcoin, knowledge isn’t just power — it’s privacy.

Have questions about wallet health or want to contribute to Caravan? Feel free
to reach out. The Bitcoin community grows stronger when we share knowledge and
build tools that empower users.

