---
layout: post
title: "My Journey to Summer of Bitcoin 2025"
date: 2025-07-05
author: Abhishek
categories: [Braidpool, Stories]
---

<figure>
<img src="https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*dmbNkD5D-u45r44go_cf0g.png"/>
</figure>

Hey! I’m Abhishek, a pre-final year student pursuing a Bachelor's degree in
Information Technology from [UIET, Panjab University,
Chandigarh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panjab_University). I enjoy working
with new technologies related to web development and DevOps, and I try to stay
as tech-agnostic as possible. Along with exploring emerging tools and
frameworks, I’m particularly interested in developing complex frontends and
backends optimized for performance, and deploying them using containerization
tools.

I was a contributor in Google Summer of Code 2024 ([Link to my final
report](https://github.com/its-me-abhishek/gsoc-report)), and I’m excited to
share that I’ll be a contributor in [Google Summer of Code
2025](https://github.com/its-me-abhishek/gsoc25-report) as well!

To know more about me, please do visit my
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/abhishek-6009a224b/),
[GitHub](https://github.com/its-me-abhishek), or [Portfolio](https://its-me-
abhishek.github.io/). I’ll continue writing more blogs about **SoB** and
**GSoC** as the weeks go by :)

## **What is SoB?**

**Summer of Bitcoin (SoB)** is a global summer internship program that
introduces university students to open-source development and design focused
on Bitcoin. Students go through several challenging rounds of assignments over
a few weeks, and those who pass get the opportunity to write a proposal for
one of the listed projects on the official SoB website. These proposals are
reviewed by mentors, and selected students get to contribute to those projects
over the course of the program.

You can find more details about SoB on their [official website
here](https://www.summerofbitcoin.org/).

## **What will I be working on in SoB?**

I’ll be working on the development of the **Braidpool Monitoring Dashboard**
this summer under the **Braidpool** organization.

After completing the initial assignments, I began actively monitoring the list
of projects and organizations that aligned with my interests, especially those
with active communication channels (like Discord, in Braidpool’s case). Once I
joined their server, I began engaging with the community and enjoyed the
conversations happening there. Hence I decided to work on the projects in this
organization

## **The Braidpool Monitoring Dashboard**

To get started, I read the **Braidpool Consensus** documentation and explored
the existing codebase to understand how “braids” function. This groundwork
helped me prototype a **DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph)** visualization that
dynamically updates as new “beads” are added to the braid.

I implemented this using pure **D3.js** integrated into **React with
TypeScript** , aiming for minimal re-renders and high performance.

This is my progress so far, and I plan to contribute even more throughout the
summer!

## What’s next?

Soon, I’ll begin building the **Bitcoin Statistics** page, which will provide
insights into Bitcoin, such as its price, recent percentage changes, hashrate
fluctuations, transaction metrics, and more. I’ll also continue refining the
visualization layout. More blog posts will follow as the summer progresses :)

Stay Tuned!

