---
layout: post
title: "Cracking Summer of Bitcoin 2025"
date: 2025-06-03
author: Arunabha Dhal
categories: [Galoy, Stories]
---

## Week 1: Interacting with a Bitcoin Node

Learning to use Bitcoin Core’s RPC to interact with a running Bitcoin node,
creating and broadcasting transactions.

## Week 2: Building a P2SH-P2WSH Multisig Transaction

Creating signed P2SH-P2WSH multisig transactions, calculating sighashes, and
computing ECDSA signatures.

## Week 3: Mining First Block

Simulating the mining process, validating transactions, and successfully
mining them into a block.

## **Week 4: Parsing a Descriptor**

Generating addresses from descriptors and calculating total balances by
fetching transaction data from Esplora.

**My experience with the Challenges :  
** I was simultaneously working for my internship and had my mid sem
examination around the corner. So I rushed and completed all the 4 challenges
within a week .  
But later , keeping in mind about everyone’s examination, SOB team decided to
make the 4th challenge optional.

# Organization Selection and Proposal Process

After completing the challenges, the proposal round began. I started to look
at the past year organizations. I found Coinswap to be very interesting. I
started contributing to the Coinswap before proposal round began.

Although the initial list of participating organizations dropped on March 16,
new additions continued rolling in through the end of the month. Once
everything was finalized, I drafted two proposals for Coinswap and one for
Galoy.

## Why I chose Galoy and Coinswap:

I was already familiar with the Coinswap codebase and had contributed to it,
so I decided to draft two proposals for that project.

As Galoy participated quite late, so I didn’t have the same head start with
their codebase. However, one of their DevOps-focused problem statements
immediately caught my attention — it involved AWS, Terraform, Kubernetes, and
Helm, all technologies I’d been eager to learn to kick off my DevOps journey
alongside blockchain. To prepare, I dove into those tools and studied every
available resource and relevant code before tackling the competency test and
writing my proposal.

First for the competency test and for the proposal itself, I thoroughly
studied all available resources and the codebase.

# Result :

The results came out on May 5, right in the middle of my end-semester exams,
and It started off being quite heartbreaking: both of my Coinswap proposals
were listed as second choices. That meant I’d only get in if someone ahead of
me dropped out — but I was so certain that wouldn’t happen. It felt like “so
close, yet so far” lol. The SoB team said they’d let me know by May 9 if
anything changed, but of course, nothing did, so I missed out on Coinswap.

Now, you must be wondering what’s about Galoy…yes Galoy delayed the result by
over a week. They announced their result on may of 12th. I was almost out of
hope and expecting nothing .

**But guess what , BOOM my proposal got accepted and I got selected in
Galoy…**

# Final Result:

I’m happy to announce that my proposal for the Summer of Bitcoin program was
accepted. Over the next 12 weeks, I’ll be working closely with the **Galoy**
team to build the AWS infrastructure.

<figure>
<img src="https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*KFYNO6_06BRm-GFDwmQJqg.png"/>
</figure>

 _My Summer of Bitcoin acceptance email_

# My Project: **Extending Galoy-Infra to Support AWS**

I’ll be working on extending the existing Galoy-Infra Terraform codebase with
dedicated AWS modules, enabling a full, turnkey deployment of the Galoy
Bitcoin banking stack on Amazon Web Services.

## Expected Outcomes

  * Terraform code to deploy Galoy Infrastructure on AWS
  * Kubernetes Ingress exposed to an external IP address on AWS
  * Restricted IAM permissions for service accounts and users
  * Bastion host access configured with 2FA
  * Terraform state stored securely in an S3 bucket
  * Documentation mirroring GCP implementation for AWS-specific setup
  * CI pipeline with Concourse to automate our build, test, and deployment workflows.

## Skills Required

  * AWS (EC2, EKS, IAM, VPC)
  * Kubernetes
  * Terraform
  * Git for version control
  * Helm

**This opportunity will allow me to:**

  * Gain hands-on experience designing and managing Bitcoin banking infrastructure.
  * Contribute to a real-world project with real users
  * Work closely with experienced mentors like [Kartik](https://www.linkedin.com/in/krtk6160/).
  * Further develop my technical and collaboration skills

# **Proposals:**

**Link to my selected Proposal
for**[**Galoy**](https://www.galoy.io/)**:**[**Extending Galoy-Infra to
Support
AWS**](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YfMJ5L1DRGxXfMkWkl9sme3l6vDoOpscU9Ico-
KZTtc/edit?usp=sharing)

If you’d like to check out my other proposal for Coinswap which couldn’t make
it (But definitely check out the accepted ones for Coinswap):

  * [Wallet Encryption and Backup Mechanism](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1T2vOO7fDAqi_IMhHCj4JC4OcUUupJ-PuvDW2l2F3knU/edit?usp=sharing)
  * [Fix taker Private Key Handover Exploit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1euP8_Zfolq5O0aqOCPvy_uDr4Qow-hNorTZJT78WfOo/edit?usp=sharing)

# Advice for Future Applicants:

If you’re planning to apply to Summer of Bitcoin in the future, here are some
pointers from my experience:

  * Begin early and build a strong grasp of Bitcoin fundamentals
  * Actively contribute to the organization you’re targeting
  * Keep communication channels open with potential mentors
  * Aim for impactful, high-quality contributions over sheer volume
  * Prepare a comprehensive, well-structured proposal

© 2025 Arunabha Dhal | [Summer of Bitcoin](https://www.summerofbitcoin.org/) Participant

